---
title: Version Control via Git
layout: post
excerpt_separator: ""
excerpt: "Version control has dramatically changed the way that people are able to collaborate with one another."
---

# Version Control via Git
### Understanding the Utilization of Version Control via Git and Github

Version control has dramatically changed the way that people are able to collaborate with one another.

In the past, programmers working together on a project would create concise, individual modules that they would later amalgamate into the larger product at various stages for testing or deployment. These 'chunks' of work were larger by nature and often unwieldy; work by two programmers simultaneously was often limited because A's update to an important function may have broken it while A finished testing on it, but any dependencies on that function were therefore put out of commission until A was finished.

Version control technologies and practices have changed this by reducing the size of a working 'chunk' to whatever discrete unit the programmer feels is appropriate for their project. Updating their work in chunks often, sometimes 10 or more times a day, and each of these updates, or commits as they're called in git, is a refresh point that can be regained simply by reverting back to whatever version they'd like to access. Since development inevitably results in breaking a program at one point or another, this ability goes a long way to prevent updates made today to bring an entire application out of production until it's resolved.

This modern technology goes further than this, though, by creating an environment that allows for multiple developers to work on the same application at once without stepping on each other's toes. The process of copying your own 'image' of the project via local repositories on your computer and branching throughout a project allows for multiple versions of the project to exist simultaneously. This means that if A wants to fix a large bug, they can pull their own 'copy' of the project away, work on it until the bug is resolved, then merge it back into the main project, resulting in a fix without ever losing a second of production.

Now imagine a team of 50 developers working on the same application over the course of the week. Each of them has their own copy of the entire project on their own local drives, and as they work, they may create their own individual branches or share them with others. As they produce changes to the project, they can do much of their own testing without ever having to affect the version in production. As various teams finish their own assignments, other developers can 'refresh' their copy of the entire project to include such changes as they're pushed into production and branches are merged back into the main. This workflow allows some very serious versatility in how a project will go through changes.

Another major advantage to using technologie like git is the native focus on proper documentation. As changes and chunks are published, teams have the ability to easily and robustly document what each push and publication has done. This helps with time tracking- what did developer A do this week? Simply look up the log of chunks they've pushed to the main project over the week. Further, since the git documentation tracks what each chunk accomplished, finding the origin of bugs can be much easier than simply searching through thousands of files and lines of code. You can even revert to before the publication of that chunk if the bug is too dangerous to leave alone.

Websites such as Github take the advantages of version control one step further by establishing vibrant communities of developers who can share their code openly, or store it privately among their teams through tools designed specifically for online disbursement and manipulation. For Open Source projects, this is a dream come true- simply go to Github, pull the most recent copy of the code, and get to work. Even for closed source, team projects, storing all the code on a remote server like Github allows people to access the core of the project at any time, from anywhere.

Thanks to version control, the concept of stepping on other developer's toes is virtually nonexistant. Programmers can do their work, test it, and push it to production all from their own corner of the project without major interference from others. Native documentation tools allow for teams to monitor each others work and to keep track of progress on all the various pieces of the larger puzzle. Github allows individual and teams of developers to access their code from anywhere at anytime, all while buiilding a robust community that has helped to create positive and easy-to-understand best practices. Version control has become a cornerstone of development in the modern world, an essential tool and knowledge for every developer.