---
title: My Fuel Cell
layout: post
topcolor: red
excerpt_separator: ""
excerpt: "Looking back at some of my most satisfying moments in life, one unquestionably consistent element is discipline. I define this simply as 'Doing the things I don't want to do'."
---
# My Fuel Cell
### How discipline and introspection allow me to become my own fuel cell

Looking back at some of my most satisfying moments in life, one unquestionably consistent element is discipline. I define this simply as "Doing the things I don't want to do".

I think I'm a fairly simple sort of person. I like to eat and drink, sleep in late, play video games, socialize, etc etc; I don't like cleaning or paying bills or doing boring and dull work. Nothing special here. But the obvious and frustrating life-truth I've found as an adult is that there is a great deal of this undesired work that simply must be done in order to progress or move forward.

Discipline is the ability to proactively do those undesired things because they need completed, mood be damned. It means that I keep my kitchen clean because it's best clean; it means doing ALL of the reading even if it drives me crazy. It means sending emails and texts and making phone calls to people to maintain healthy relationships even though what I really want to do is eat an entire box of Cheeze-Its while watching Bob's Burgers. Yes, I actually do that sometimes.

It goes beyond simply completing tasks. Discipline is fueled by satisfaction, by knowing that I am do the right thing for me at that moment. Sure, watching a great deal of hilarious TV is nice here and there, and it sure is fun to play video games straight for 36 hours, but what do those things get me? Some peace of mind but little else.

Keeping my eyes on the prize, my mind on my future, and my thirst directed at achieving every goal with the greatest success are what power me and enable Discipline to guide me to what needs to be done. Every great moment of my life has come at the cost of time and energy and a significant amount of discipline.

This value, among others, help push me towards the future with focus and clarity. I desire to approach DBC with discipline of the mind and body. Self-respect and integrity are guiding principles, and efficiency works hand-in-hand with the other values to (hopefully) turn me into a lean, ambitious learning machine that will eventually become a programming master.

Considering my values causes me to immediately measure my current state up against them. Am I disciplined enough? Have I been acting with integrity? And I in a healthy environment that encourages self-respect and fosters a positive learning attitude? Like an internal medical exam, I run myself against an entire battery of tests to assess and judge if a change is needed.

I've learned that skill over the years, and it's been a huge asset in overcoming any obstacle, including stereotype threat. The internalization of cultural rifts and prejudices, stereotype threat can be particularly insidious because it buries itself deep in your perception and underlying thoughts. Purposeful introspect and a careful questioning of perspectives, motivations, and intentions can act as powerful tools to uproot stereotype threat and mitigate the damage it causes.

As with any new endeavor, it isn't enough to show up; you must work hard, as well. And it isn't enough that you work hard; you must work smart, too. Working smart comes from purposeful thought and decision making, a skill derived from powerful critical thinking. Critical thinking depends on having data to analyze, and this information can only be gathered by first showing up both physically and mentally.

Success and overcoming difficulty is a positive feedback cycle in both positive and negative directions. Make it work for you; you are your own fuel cell. Be brave, be disciplined, and be successful.