---
title: The Triple Threat
layout: post
topcolor: red
excerpt_separator: ""
excerpt: "I've been working professionally for about 7 years and in pretty varied environments. I've gone overseas and helped build a new business from the ground up, I've gotten to interface with members of the US state department and our nation's ambassador's the world; I've also worked in cafes, libraries, bookstores, tutoring centers, and drugstores. While the differences between the work flows from one job to another can be astounding at times, one of the few consistencies was that no matter what, I was working with other people."
---
# The Triple Threat
### How Feedback can Facilitate a win for everyone

I've been working professionally for about 7 years and in pretty varied environments. I've gone overseas and helped build a new business from the ground up, I've gotten to interface with members of the US state department and our nation's ambassador's the world; I've also worked in cafes, libraries, bookstores, tutoring centers, and drugstores. While the differences between the work flows from one job to another can be astounding at times, one of the few consistencies was that no matter what, I was working with other people.

Now, I am not naturally a people person, I think. I was a very smiley child and a very frustrat[ed/ing] teenager, and by time I hit college, I had firmly planted myself in a shell where the idea of talking to others was about as unappealing as anything could ever be. Fortunately, my time at The Ohio State University helped crack that shell and teach me not only the value of interacting with others, but the skill set necessary to do so.

But in the process of learning that, and learning anything really, we all make mistakes, and mistakes are never corrected without feedback. I remember how many sit-down conversations I've had over the years; be they formal or informal, low-key or highly tense, friendly or outright antagonistic. I was fortunate enough to learn early on that regardless of how the feedback is given, it is always an opportunity to learn something.

My experience with feedback in DBC so far has been very positive. I love the focus that the program takes on not only teaching people how to take both positive and negative feedback, but also in giving it. I've had many superiors over the years who had great insight and suggestions for me on how I can be a more productive or better-functioning member of the team who simply had no proper way of expressing it. DBC's emphasis on teaching this skill from day one. It is not negotiable; it is essential.

I agree very strongly with this attitude and love that I get to participate in it. So far, the feedback that I've received has been largely positive which helps create a real sense of pride in myself- I've spent years sharpening these interpersonal skills, many of which were real trial-by-fire sort of situations.

I have received some negative feedback as well and understanding the best way to intake criticism, process it, and learn from it is a whole skill set in and of itself. First, we have to remember that everything must be taken with a grain of salt- or two, or three. The person giving your feedback is also a flawed human being, and the story that they see in you is built from their own mindset and worldview. Further, the feedback at DBC is largely given by beginners just like myself, and so it takes a discerning ear to hear what someone is saying and actually understanding what they intend to communicate. It's important to always remember that communication in any context is a two-way day; the burden lies fully and equally on both parties to make a successful conversation.

Making a point out of processing and acting on the negative feedback that I've received has already begun to enrich my life outside of DBC. Having worked in a fairly brusque environment for some time, I've definitely built of some negative communication habits. Without a doubt, I'm extremely thankful for those that I've interacted with who have been willing to point out some areas that I need to work on, and I have been trying very hard to do so. Thank you all for that.

In terms of giving feedback, at times it feels almost unnatural. If after a pairing, I walk away feeling great because of the ease with which my partner and I have communicated sensitively and kindly to each other, all while accomplishing the task at hand successfully, it can be very difficult to find something critical to say. I do firmly believe that critical feedback has a very necessary role in personal and professional growth, but I often feel forced to nitpick the smallest things apart simply to find something negative to say about my partner who performed so fantastically.

In those circumstances, I'm still wrestling with the question of how best to handle it. Should I continue nitpicking, even as our sessions may come together even tighter and stronger? If I have nothing critical in my mind, is it really to anyone's benefit to dig for it? This is a regular thought that I've had recently while giving feedback recently. I've yet to come to a decision, but it's something worth examining.

DBC's push to have its students critically examine themselves and the people around them is a fundamental part of their path to producing amazing 'beginners'. It is a strive to create not just competent coders, but fantastic workers and communicators. As even the tech world grows more interrelated and communication-heavy, there is no lack of need for great, efficient, direct, and kind communication. It's a principle that when really grown in all workers and not just those in the upper echelons, everyone truly benefits- managers, workers, and clients.

And what's better than a win-win-win?