---
title: Keep It Cool
layout: post
topcolor: red
excerpt_separator: ""
excerpt: "I worked overseas for several years in South Korea and got to see a pretty wide variety of work environments while I was there. My first job, though, was oftentimes a total nightmare with a totally disorganized office and a very serious inability to communicate expectations. I learned a lot of really terrible habits, but one incident in particular always sticks out."
---
# Keep It Cool
### Conflict Resolution, THE Essential Skill

I worked overseas for several years in South Korea and got to see a pretty wide variety of work environments while I was there. My first job, though, was oftentimes a total nightmare with a totally disorganized office and a very serious inability to communicate expectations. I learned a lot of really terrible habits, but one incident in particular always sticks out.

At the time, I was teaching for a kindergarten and afterwards, after school classes to elementary and middle school students. We typically had 10 hour todays, but with several breaks throughout the day to rest and work on grading and course prep. Although this was already much longer hours than my contract allowed for, all of the teachers just went along with it. On a Monday, I got my schedule for the week and found out that all of my breaks had been removed without explanation. I was also given additional late night classes, and my lunches had been taken away, giving me a workload of 11 or 12 hours every day with no breaks.

To put it simply, I was peeved. I tried to sat down with the scheduler to discuss it but she refused, saying that I shouldn't complain since I had a job. I grew increasingly frustrated and ended up raising my voice just to be heard- it turned into a shouting match that went absolutely nowhere.

I like to keep this memory close by because to me, it's a great example of everything going wrong, and why good conflict resolution is necessary. My relationship with the scheduler never really recovered, I embarassed myself, AND my desired resolution was never met- I still had to work the awful schedule. It was unproductive and damaging.

That was a long time ago- I've matured a lot since then, read a lot, learned a lot, and I won't forget how terribly badly that worked out for everyone involved. Not only should I have kept a cool head, I made a lot of other mistakes as well:

* I displayed a fundamental lack of respect for my scheduler's job by approaching her aggressively.
* I raised my voice which never helps and only sets the other person on the defensive.
* I addressed the matter publicly and in front of coworkers instead of privately.
* I did not begin with why I think the schedule needed changed, instead communicating only my overall dissatisfaction.
* I gave her no space to speak, never asking why the schedule had ended up this way.

I'm thankful that I was able to learn the importance of good conflict resolution early on in my working career. Of course, I still struggle, but now I know a much better method for handling differences or conflicts:

* Always consider the reason for the action that led to an issue or conflict. Never react before taking a moment to try to grasp whatever perspective led to the decision.
* Always approach whoever I need to speak to with respect. Communicate calmly and respectfully, recgonizing and acknowledging their role and value.
* Don't blame others for issues, even if they are the ultimate decision maker. More often than not, they don't want to inconvenience or bother anyone, but sometimes there is no avoiding it.
* Always remember that work is a team game, and that you're all ultimately on the same team.
* Always seek to explain your understanding, your needs, and your desires in a clear manner, and ensure that the person you're speaking with has the opportunity to see your perspective.

In the end, not every conflict is easily resolved, but approaching it with the above ideas and actions at hand can at the very least help preserve a sense of respect and team-ness. Come always with respect and humility, and even if you don't get what you want, you can walk away with at least the pride of knowing that you acted like a professional.